"Really, Papa, Prince Bagration worried less," his son said with a smile. "He worried less before the battle of Schon Grabern than you do now."
The old Count acted angry. "Yes, you talk. But try it yourself!"
The Count turned to the cook. The cook had a smart and polite face. He looked carefully and kindly at the father and son.
"What are young people doing now, Feoktist?" he said. "They laugh at us old men!"
"That is true, your excellency. They only have to eat a good dinner. They do not have to make the dinner or serve it. That is not their work!"
"That is it, that is it!" the Count said loudly. He was happy. He took his son by both hands. He cried, "Now I have you! Take the sleigh with two horses now. Go to Pierre Bezukhov's house. Tell him, 'Count Ilya Rostov sent you to ask for strawberries and new pineapples.' No one else has them. Pierre is not home. So you must go in and ask the princesses. From there, go to Rasgulyay. The coachman Ipatka knows the way. Find the gypsy Ilyushka. He danced at Count Orlov's house. You remember him. He wore a white Cossack coat. Bring him to me."
"Should I bring the gypsy girls with him?" asked Nicholas. He laughed.
At that moment, Anna Mikhaylovna came into the hall. She walked with quiet steps. She looked busy and serious. But her face always looked kind, like a good Christian. This look was always on her face.
She saw the Count in his house clothes every day. But he always felt shy. He asked her to forgive his clothes.
"It is not a problem at all, my dear Count," she said. She closed her eyes softly. "But I will go to Pierre Bezukhov's house myself. Pierre arrived. Now we will get anything we want from his hothouses. I must see him anyway. He sent me a letter from Boris. Thank God, Boris is now working there."
The Count was very happy. Anna Mikhaylovna said she would do one of his tasks. He asked for a small closed carriage for her.
"Tell Bezukhov to come. I will write his name. Is his wife with him?" he asked.
Anna Mikhaylovna looked up with her eyes. Her face showed deep sadness. "Ah, my dear friend, he has many problems," she said. "If what we hear is true, it is very bad. We never thought this would happen. We were happy for him then! He is such a good person, young Bezukhov! Yes, I feel very sorry for him. I will try to help him feel better."
"What is the matter?" asked Nicholas Rostov and Count Ilya Rostov.
Anna Mikhaylovna made a deep sound. "Dolokhov, Mary Ivanovna's son," she said in a quiet, secret voice. "He caused her big problems, they say. Pierre helped him. Pierre invited him to his house in St. Petersburg. And now... she came here. And that bad man came after her!" Anna Mikhaylovna said. She wanted to show she felt sorry for Pierre. But her voice and small smile showed she felt sorry for the "bad man," Dolokhov.
"They say Pierre is very sad because of his bad luck."
"Oh, my! But still, tell him to come to the club. The problems will end. It will be a very big dinner."
The next day was March 3rd. Soon after one o'clock, 250 people from the English Club waited. 50 guests also waited. They waited for Prince Bagration to dinner. He was a special guest. He was a hero from the Austrian war.
When the news of the battle of Austerlitz first came, Moscow was very confused. At that time, the Russians always won wars. So when they heard about the loss, some people did not believe it. Others looked for a special reason for this strange thing.
In the English Club, all the important and smart people met. This was when the news came in December. They said nothing about the war and the last battle. It was like everyone agreed to be quiet.
The important men who led talks did not come to the club. These were Count Rostopchin, Prince Yuri Dolgorukov, Valuev, Count Markov, and Prince Vyazemski. They met in private homes with close friends. Other people in Moscow did not know what to think. They listened to these important men. Count Ilya Rostov was one of them. For some time, they had no clear ideas about the war. They had no leaders.
The people in Moscow felt something was not right. It was hard to talk about the bad news. So it was best to
After some time, important men came back. They told the club what to think. Everyone started to speak clearly. People found reasons for the Russian defeat. This defeat was very bad and hard to believe. Everything was clear now. In all parts of Moscow, people said the same things.
They said the Austrians were not loyal. The army food supply was bad. The Pole Przebyszewski and the Frenchman Langeron were not loyal. Kutuzov was not able. People also whispered about the Emperor. They said he was young. He did not have much experience. He trusted bad people.
But everyone said the Russian army was great. It did many brave things. The soldiers, officers, and generals were heroes. But the best hero was Prince Bagration. People knew him from Schon Grabern. He also led the army away from Austerlitz. He was alone, but his group stayed strong. He fought enemies for the whole day. They had twice as many men as he did.
Bagration became Moscow's hero also because he had no friends in the city. He was new there. People showed honor to a simple Russian soldier in him. This soldier had no special friends or plans. He was like Suvorov from the Italian war. Also, to honor Bagration was a good way to show dislike for Kutuzov.
Shinshin made a joke. He said, "If there was no Bagration, we would have to invent him." He spoke like Voltaire. No one spoke about Kutuzov. Only some people spoke badly about him quietly. They called him a court weathercock and an old satyr.
All Moscow repeated a saying from Prince Dolgorukov. He said, "If you make things from clay, your hands get dirty." This helped people feel better about their defeat. It made them remember old wins. Rostopchin said that French soldiers need big words to make them fight. German soldiers need good reasons to fight. They need to know it is worse to run away than to go forward. But Russian soldiers just need to be held back.
Everywhere, people heard new stories. These stories were about brave acts from officers and men at Austerlitz. One man saved a flag. Another man killed five French soldiers. A third man loaded five cannons by himself. People talked about Berg. They did not know him. They said he was hurt in his right hand. He took his sword in his left hand. Then he went forward.
No one talked about Prince Andrew Bolkonski. Only his close friends felt sad. He died very young. He left his wife, who was going to have a baby. He also left his strange father.
On that third day of March, all the rooms in the English Club were full. People talked like bees made a sound in spring. The club members and guests walked around. They sat. They stood. They met. They said goodbye. Some wore army clothes. Some wore nice evening clothes. A few had white hair powder and wore Russian coats.
Servants wore special clothes. They had powdered hair. They had special shoes and socks. They stood at all doors. They watched every person carefully. They wanted to help people. Most people there were old. They were important men. They had wide, sure faces. They had fat fingers. Their actions and voices were strong. These important men sat in their usual places. They met in their usual groups.
Some other people were there. They were young men. Denisov, Nicholas Rostov, and Dolokhov were among them. Dolokhov was an officer again in the Semenov regiment. The faces of these young men showed respect for old men. But it was a special kind of respect. It seemed to say, "We will respect you. But remember, the future is ours."
Nesvitski was there. He was an old member of the club. Pierre was there. His wife told him to grow his hair. He did not wear his glasses now. He wore nice clothes. But he looked sad and quiet. Here, like in other places, people always acted politely to Pierre. They did this because he was rich. He was used to telling people what to do. So he treated them badly, without thinking.
He was young, like the younger men. But he was rich. He had important friends. So he joined the old, respected men. He walked from one group to another. Some old men were very important. People stood around them. Even strangers came close. They wanted to hear these famous men speak.
The biggest groups were around Count Rostopchin, Valuev, and Naryshkin. Rostopchin told a story. He said Austrian soldiers attacked the Russians fast. The Russians had to fight with bayonets to get past them. Valuev told a secret. He said Uvarov came from St. Petersburg. Uvarov came to ask what people in Moscow thought about Austerlitz.
In the third group, Naryshkin spoke. He talked about a meeting of Austrian army leaders. Suvorov made a sound like a cock. He did this when the Austrian generals spoke silly things. Shinshin stood near. He tried to make a joke. He said Kutuzov did not learn from Suvorov. He did not learn how to sound like a cock. But the older men looked at Shinshin very seriously. They made him feel bad. It was not right to talk about Kutuzov like that today. Count Ilya Rostov walked around. He was in a hurry. He was thinking many things.
Count Ilya Rostov walked in his soft boots. He went between the dining room and the drawing room. He quickly said hello to everyone. He knew all the people, important and not important. He greeted them like they were all the same.
Sometimes, he looked for his son. His son was young and strong. He looked at his son. He winked at him with a happy face. Nicholas Rostov stood by a window. Dolokhov was with him. Nicholas had met Dolokhov recently. He liked Dolokhov a lot.
Count Ilya Rostov came to them. He shook Dolokhov's hand strongly. "Please visit us," he said. "You know my brave son. You were together outside. Both of you were heroes."
"Hello, Vasili Ignatovich," he said. "How are you, old friend?" He turned to an old man walking by. But he did not finish his greeting. Everyone moved quickly. A footman ran in. His face looked scared. He said, "He is here!"
Bells rang. The stewards ran forward. The guests were in different rooms. Now they all came together. They stood in the big drawing room. They stood near the ballroom door. They were many, like seeds in a shovel.
Bagration came to the door of the anteroom. He did not wear his hat. He did not have his sword. This was the custom at the club. He had given his hat and sword to the porter. He did not wear a fur cap on his head. He did not have a whip over his shoulder.
This was not how Nicholas Rostov saw him before the Battle of Austerlitz. He wore a tight, new uniform. It had Russian and foreign medals. The Star of St. George was on his left chest.
It was clear he had cut his hair and beard just before dinner. This made him look not so good. He looked a little simple and happy. He had strong, manly facial features. This made his look funny.
Bekleshev and Theodore Uvarov came with him. They stopped at the door. They let Bagration go in first. He was the main guest. Bagration felt shy. He did not want to go first. So there was a small delay at the door. But finally, he went in first.
He walked into the room. He felt shy and walked in a strange way. The floor was shiny wood. He did not know where to put his hands. He was used to walking on a muddy field. He did this when people were shooting. He had led his soldiers at Schon Grabern. That was easier for him.
The committee members met him at the first door. They were very happy to see this important guest. They took him without waiting for him to speak. They stood around him. They led him to the drawing room.
At first, no one could go into the drawing room. Many members and guests stood at the door. They pushed each other. They wanted to see Bagration well. They looked over each other's shoulders. It was like he was a strange animal.
Count Ilya Rostov laughed. He said, "Move, my friends! Move, move!" He pushed through the crowd faster than anyone. He took the guests into the drawing room. He made them sit on the sofa in the middle. The most important members of the club came around the new guests.
Count Ilya pushed through the crowd again. He left the drawing room. He came back a minute later. Another committee member was with him. Count Ilya carried a big silver plate. He gave it to Prince Bagration. On the plate were some verses. People had written and printed them for Bagration, the hero.
Bagration saw the plate. He looked around with a worried face. It was like he wanted help. But everyone looked at him. They wanted him to accept it. He felt that he had to do it.
He took the plate with both hands. He looked strong when he did it. He looked at Count Ilya Rostov. His face was serious and a little angry. Count Ilya had given him the plate.
Someone kindly took the plate from Bagration. Maybe he would have held it until night. Maybe he would have gone to dinner with it. The person showed him the verses. "Okay, I will read them," Bagration seemed to say. He looked at the paper with tired eyes. He began to read them. His face was serious.
But the writer of the verses took them. He began to read them out loud. Bagration put his head down and listened. The poem praised Bagration. It said, "You bring honor to our Emperor Alexander I. You protect our King."
"You are a strong fighter against enemies. You are kind to people at home. You are a great leader in battle." "Even Napoleon now knows Bagration. He will not try to hurt the strong Russians."
But he did not finish reading. A loud servant said that dinner was ready! The door opened. Music came from the dining room. It was a polonaise dance. It was loud music. The music played. It sang about winning. "Russians, be strong and win!" it said.
Count Ilya Rostov looked at the writer. The writer was still reading his verses. Count Ilya looked a little angry. Count Ilya bowed to Bagration. Everyone stood up. They felt that dinner was more important than the verses. Bagration went first again. He went into dinner.
Bagration sat in the best place. He sat between Bekleshev and Naryshkin. Both their names were Alexander. This was a special sign. It showed respect to the Emperor Alexander I.
Three hundred people sat down in the dining room. They sat based on how important they were. Important people sat closer to Bagration. This was the normal way.
Just before dinner, Count Ilya Rostov showed his son to Bagration. Bagration knew Nicholas. He said some words to him. His words were not smooth or clear. All his words that day were like this. Count Ilya looked around with a happy and proud face. Bagration was talking to his son.
Nicholas Rostov sat near the middle of the table. Denisov was with him. Dolokhov was also with him. Nicholas had just met Dolokhov. Pierre sat opposite them. He sat next to Prince Nesvitski. Count Ilya Rostov was with the other members.
Count Ilya Rostov and the committee sat facing Bagration. Count Ilya Rostov showed Moscow hospitality. He took care of the Prince.
He tried hard. His work was successful. The dinner was very good. He served all kinds of food. But he was not calm until the meal ended.
He winked at the butler. He spoke softly to the footmen. He waited for each dish with some worry. Everything was very good.
Then came the second dish. It was a very big sterlet fish. Count Ilya Rostov saw it. He felt happy and a little shy. The footmen opened bottles. They filled the champagne glasses.
After the fish, people liked it very much. The Count looked at the other committee members. He whispered, "We will drink to many people. It is time to start." He took his glass. He stood up.
Everyone was quiet. They waited to hear him speak. He shouted, "To the health of our Emperor!" His eyes filled with tears. He was very happy.
The band immediately started to play a song. The song was "Conquest’s joyful thunder waken..." Everyone stood up. They shouted, "Hurrah!" Bagration also stood up. He shouted, "Hurrah!" He used the same voice he used on the field at Schon Grabern.
People could hear Young Rostov’s very happy voice. It was louder than the other three hundred people. He almost cried. He shouted loudly, "To the health of our Emperor! Hurrah!" He drank all his glass quickly. Then he threw it on the floor. Many people did the same thing. The loud shouting went on for a long time.
When the voices became quiet, the footmen took away the broken glass. Everyone sat down again. They smiled at the noise they made. They talked to each other.
The old Count stood up again. He looked at a note next to his plate. He said a toast, "To the health of the hero from our last war, Prince Peter Ivanovich Bagration!" Again, his blue eyes filled with tears.
The three hundred voices shouted, "Hurrah!" again. The band did not play. A choir started singing a song. Paul Ivanovich Kutuzov made this song. The song said: "Russians! Go over all problems! Bravery brings victory. We have Bagration! He makes enemies fall down... and so on."
When the singing stopped, people made many more toasts. Count Ilya Rostov felt very emotional. People smashed more glasses. The shouting became louder. They drank to Bekleshev, Naryshkin, Uvarov, Dolgorukov, Apraksin, Valuev. They also drank to the committee. They drank to all the club members and guests. Last, they drank to Count Ilya Rostov alone. He planned the big dinner.
When they drank to him, the Count got his handkerchief. He put it over his face. He cried a lot.
Pierre sat across from Dolokhov and Nicholas Rostov. He ate and drank a lot, as always. But people who knew him well saw something. Something big changed in him that day.
He was quiet during the whole dinner. He looked around. He blinked. He looked angry. Sometimes his eyes stayed still. He was not paying attention. He often rubbed his nose. His face looked sad.
It seemed he did not see or hear anything happening near him. He only thought about a sad problem. He could not fix this problem. His problem made him feel very bad. It came from two things. First, his cousin, a princess in Moscow, gave him hints. She said Dolokhov and Pierre's wife were very close. Second, he got a letter that morning. Nobody signed it. The letter was not kind. It made jokes. It said Pierre did not see well with his glasses. But it said everyone knew about his wife and Dolokhov. Only Pierre did not know this secret.
Pierre did not believe the princess' hints or the letter. But he was now afraid to look at Dolokhov. Dolokhov sat across from him. Sometimes he looked into Dolokhov’s eyes. Dolokhov had good-looking eyes. But they looked proud and rude. Pierre felt a terrible, bad feeling inside him. He looked away fast.
He thought about his wife's past. He thought about her time with Dolokhov. He did not want to think about it. Pierre understood. Maybe the letter was true. Or maybe it just looked true. But the letter was about his wife.
He remembered something without wanting to. Dolokhov got his old job back after the war. Then he came back to St. Petersburg. He came to Pierre's house. Dolokhov and Pierre were good friends. Dolokhov used this friendship. He came straight to Pierre’s house. Pierre let him stay there. Pierre also gave him money.
Pierre remembered Helene. She smiled, but she did not like it. She did not like Dolokhov living in their house. Pierre also remembered Dolokhov. Dolokhov spoke about Helene's beauty. He spoke in a bad way. He did not care about Pierre's feelings. From that time, Dolokhov stayed with them every day. He stayed until they came to Moscow.
Pierre thought, "Yes, he is very good-looking. I know him." Pierre thought, "He would like it very much. He would bring shame to my name. He would make fun of me. I worked hard for him. I was his friend. I helped him." Pierre thought, "I know this. It would make him happy to trick me. This is if it is true." Pierre thought, "Yes, if it is true. But I do not believe it. I should not believe it. I cannot believe it."
He remembered the look on Dolokhov’s face. This was when Dolokhov was cruel. For example, he tied a policeman to a bear. Then he dropped them into the water. Or he asked a man to fight. He had no good reason. Or he shot a post-boy’s horse with a pistol. Dolokhov often made that face when he looked at Pierre.
Pierre thought, "Yes, he is a bully. Killing a man means nothing to him." Pierre thought, "He must think everyone is afraid of him. That must make him happy." Pierre thought, "He must think I am also afraid of him."
“I am afraid of him.” Pierre thought this. He felt a bad, scary feeling inside him again.
Dolokhov, Denisov, and Nicholas Rostov sat opposite Pierre. They looked very happy. Nicholas Rostov talked happily to his two friends. One friend was a brave hussar. The other friend was a famous duelist and a bad man. Nicholas Rostov often looked at Pierre with a strange smile. Pierre was big and tall. He looked like he was thinking deeply. Everyone at dinner could see him.
Nicholas Rostov looked at Pierre with dislike. First, Pierre was a rich man. He was not a soldier. He was the husband of a very beautiful woman. Nicholas Rostov thought Pierre was like an old woman. Second, Pierre was deep in thought. He did not see Nicholas Rostov. He did not say hello back.
They drank to the Emperor’s health. Pierre was lost in thought. He did not stand up. He did not lift his glass.
“What are you doing?” Nicholas Rostov shouted. He was very angry. “Do you not hear? We are drinking to the Emperor!”
Pierre sighed. He stood up without arguing. He emptied his glass. He waited for everyone to sit down again. Then he turned to Nicholas Rostov. He gave a kind smile.
“Oh, I did not know it was you!” Pierre said. But Nicholas Rostov was busy. He was shouting “Hurrah!”
“Why do you not talk to him again?” Dolokhov said to Nicholas Rostov.
“He is a fool!” Nicholas Rostov said.
“You should be nice to men who have beautiful wives,” said Denisov.
Pierre did not hear their words well. But he knew they were talking about him. His face turned red. He looked away.
“Now, to beautiful women!” Dolokhov said. He looked serious. But a small smile was on his face. He turned to Pierre with his glass. “To lovely women, Peterkin, and the men they love!” he added.
Pierre looked down. He drank from his glass. He did not look at Dolokhov. He did not answer him.
A servant gave out paper notes. These notes had Kutuzov’s song on them. The servant put one note in front of Pierre. Pierre was an important guest.
Pierre was going to take the note. But Dolokhov leaned over the table. He quickly took the note from Pierre's hand. He started to read it.